hello everybody my name is J I'm one of
the expert IELTS teachers here at e to
language what we're going to do is not
write an essay instead we're going to
look at some top tips one tip in
particular which I'm afraid to say will
come right at the end of this
presentation but I need to take you
through this presentation so that that
tip at the end really makes sense to you
and so you fully utilize it to your
benefit so what we're going to do
specifically is look at real tips for
how to score an 8 plus in writing task 2
okay let me first tell you my little
experience maybe you've heard this
before maybe you haven't I'm an English
teacher obviously I'm a native English
speaker I had to take the IELTS four
times before I got a decent score in
writing I could get nines in reading
listening and speaking not no problem
was still challenging but writing I got
stuck on seven point five three times
and so I did some investigation into why
it is that I got stuck and why so many
people get stuck at sort of six point
five to seven and it turns out that
there are certain ways that you need to
write your essay in order to boost your
score so one of those ways is looking at
grammar and that's what we're going to
look at here these ugly looking things
are what the examiners use to mark your
writing and there's one here which
focuses on two things grammatical range
and grammatical accuracy okay these two
things are key for boosting your score
the first one grammatical range means
variety of sentence types okay you need
to use a variety of different sentence
types to boost your score and
grammatical accuracy well it means
grammatical accuracy that your sentences
are correct and accurate and there's s
on the end of plural nouns and you use
articles properly in your verb tenses
are straight etc have a look at these
two paragraphs these two paragraphs
perfectly accurate grandma okay so I
mentioned that you wrote these two
paragraphs and everything you wrote was
just a hundred percent accurate however
there's a big problem here and that
problem is range these sentences are all
simple sentences or compound sentences
there are no complex sentences there are
no modal verbs there are no question
sentences there are no conditionals
they're all just simple sentences so
what score do you think you would get
for grammar you would get a four because
here in the criteria what the examiners
look at it says rare use of subordinate
clause I'm going to show you what a
subordinate clause is in a minute
but the maximum score you can get the
maximum score you can get if you do not
use a variety of sentence structures is
four okay so even if your accuracy is
nine but your range is 4 your score for
grammar will be four that's the highest
you can possibly get so let's say then
let's say you wrote perfectly on task
and you answer the essay question and
the examiner gave you an 8 for that part
and this way that you structured the
essay instructed your paragraphs the
examiner gave you an 8 for that part and
your vocabulary was excellent it was
very wide-ranging so the examiner gave
you an 8 for that part but the examiner
gave you a 4 for grammar because your
range was limited in that case the
average for your total writing band
score would be 7 because the 4 brings it
down to 7 and let's say the same thing
happened here you got 7 for task 7 for
structure 7 for vocab and 4 for grammar
the maximum score you can get for
writing then because of the grammar
score is 6 right so the super tip is
this you need to use a wide variety of
sentence types in your s
and if you don't the same thing will
happen to you that happened to me and
your mark will get stuck on something
poor okay so what we're going to do in
this lesson is we're going to look at
different sentence types I'm gonna show
you seven seven I can't remember six or
seven different sentence types but we're
specifically going to focus in on
complex sentences and a particular type
of complex sentence called a subordinate
clause don't worry it sounds crazy but
it's pretty easy you probably already
know it so let's have a look so in fact
I want to show you six different
sentence types first of all let's start
with simple sentences these are
obviously quite straightforward so a
simple sentence has one idea let's use
the question prompts that let's say the
question prompt said something about the
government should tax sugary drinks
that's your writing task 2 essay prompt
or part of it so here are three simple
sentences this is 1 2 3
sugar makes people unhealthy ok it's
good it's got a subject it's got a verb
and it's got an object here or people
gain weight from sugar okay again
subject verb object sugar harms people's
teeth these three are examples of simple
sentences you should definitely include
simple sentences in your essay but again
it's about variety so let's look at
compound sentences compound sentences
are when you have one idea plus another
idea for example let's say the question
prompt again is government should it tax
sugary drinks you say sugar makes people
unhealthy and it harms their teeth so
here we're using a conjunction like and
for yet but so or or nor there's a few
different conjunctions or different ways
that you can create a compound
sentence fine these ones there are the
critical ones you need to include what
I'm about to show you into your essay
and I suggest you clear include at least
five at least five of these complex
sentences using these words these are
the words the IELTS examiner's look for
these are the sentence types that create
subordination which I'll show you in a
second after although as because before
even if even though if in order that
once provided that rather than since so
that then that though unless until when
whenever where where else who whether
while and which okay so let's have a
look at some examples here so what a
complex sentence does it coordinates two
or more ideas into a single sentence so
the prompt is the government should tax
sugary drinks my complex sentence using
the connector while is this while some
people will support the tax others will
be against it so let's remove this and
let's have a look at let's say it just
said some people will support the tax
full-stop others will be against it so
here I've got two simple sentences but
if I use one of these subordinate clause
type words like while I can create a
complex sentence okay and these are the
sentences that make you win in IELTS
writing so what I did on my fourth
attempt after I investigated and did all
this homework and realize what was going
on and actually had a meeting with the
IELTS people when I wrote my fourth
attempt I thought okay usually when I
write essays or emails or whatever I
like to write short simple sentences
because I believe that they're clearer
but that's not what you should do in the
ions you need to use a variety as I said
so what I did on the fourth attempt was
I use a whole variety of different
sentence types I use complex ones and
compound
and simple ones I even put questions in
made sure they'll pass see if I use
modal verbs da da da da
but I made sure that I had at least five
of these complex structures now I want
you to try to write a few okay I'm going
to give you two minutes to write three
complex sentences the prompt is the
government should tax sugary drinks so
your complex sentence will go or la da
da comma da da da da
. or da da da da da
so that da da da da da because da da da
da da comma da da da da da so try to
fill these gaps with some information
from the prompt you have two minutes to
write three complex sentences to
increase your IELTS band score starting
now
you
okay maybe you need more time seeing
people have sort of still in the first
type of sentence let me push on what I
want you to do if you haven't finished I
want you to pause the video go back and
finish those three sentences okay I'm
going to show you mine but if you
haven't finished please go back and do
that now let me show you mine
okay here are my examples although
people will benefit companies will
suffer again let's look at this because
what's going on let's say we get rid of
this and we just have people who benefit
companies will suffer two simple
sentences or I can Mia make a complex
sentence using this powerful word here
what about so that the government should
tax sodas so that the public becomes
healthier okay again I've got two simple
sentences but I've created a complex
sentence using so that what about number
three using the word because at the
beginning of the sentence because people
are becoming more obese the government
should tax sugary drinks there you go
it's actually I shouldn't say it's not
that hard it's hard to get these
accurate and you definitely need to
practice them because as I said without
them four is the maximum score you can
get in grammar okay I seriously mean
that you can double-check the criteria
if you want there are extraordinarily
important sentence types so the big take
home message is this you need to use
complex sentences in your writing task 1
and 2 by the way use it in both of your
writing tasks let's have a quick look at
the other sentence types before we
finish so passive sentences so the
prompt again the government should taxed
sugary drinks well the passive sentence
is when you reverse the order of the
subject and the object for example
here's the active sentence food
scientists know that sugary drinks are
addictive let's say we want to reverse
this order and we don't want to talk
about food scientist we can say sugary
drinks are known to be addictive okay so
I've created a passive form from the
active form they're so passive sentences
are also important in your writing to
show variety let's have a look at a
question sentence but what a sugar tax
really work my suggestion here is to use
one question in your essay I think they
work really well if they're placed
properly okay they can work really well
in I put one in my last one where I got
the 8.5 and I think I put it in the
introduction but it was just a short
simple sentence as a question type and
it just created a nice sort of narrative
voice for the essay and it just added to
my variety so do you think about putting
perhaps one question into your essay
there because it can work well the last
one our conditional sentence one is our
conditional sentences these are somewhat
complex these are conditional sentences
our sentences that start with if if
sentences so if the government had taxed
sugary drinks earlier then we would not
have an obesity issue now so how do you
strike a balance though between
grammatical range and grammatical
accuracy because perhaps if you're
attempting to use a wider variety of
sentence types your accuracy will go
down or maybe if you're trying to be
very accurate your grammatical range
will go down so how do you strike that
balance between variety and accuracy
that's a critical question question is
do you need to distract a balance here's
the thing if you do not attempt if there
is rare use of subordinate clauses in
other words you rarely use complex
structures then you will get a four
okay but if you attempt complex
sentences even if they're less accurate
remember this is the same thing that the
IELTS examiner's are looking at when
they're marking your writing you can get
a five of course if you're even if let's
say you're a native English speaker so
your accuracy is nine you should
definitely try to attempt a wide variety
of different sentence structures because
then it will just boost your score but
even if your English is quite poor and
you're worried about accuracy at least
try to use a wide variety so the take
home message the key point that I wanted
to talk about right at the beginning
which I led you through is this variety
sentence variety is more important than
sentence accuracy so on test day you
should attempt to use a wide variety of
sentence types including the six that I
showed you in this live class and even
if the accuracy is not hundred percent
doesn't matter it will increase your
chances of scoring better than if you
are conservative and just attempt simple
structures that my friend is the end of
that presentation if you need help with
your IELTS in any way speaking listening
reading writing check out e to language
comm sign up for free and you may want
to think about upgrading your account
for one on one tutorials writing
feedback lots of practice questions
sample essays over V lessons methodology
lessons like this one that take you
through everything the course can last
well there's a lot of material it can
last about three to six months if you
want to do it slowly or you can blast
through it in about a week to get the
main stuff there so do check out that
website if you have any questions do
check out this one here go to help dot e
to language comm help e to language comm
so it's the same as this but help ET
language comm
ask your question
we'll get back to you with an answer
okay cool bananas